Introduction

Choosing hedge funds that can consistently outperform their peers is a challanging endeavor, even with a robust process and an experienced team. One significant challenge in active hedge fund selection is the wide return distribution among funds. Not all hedge funds are alike, even within the same investment strategies. This diversity in performance is what makes the selection process both fascinating but also complex and hard to get right.

Return Dispersion
In this chart, we show the return dispersion in a box-and-whisker chart for different types of strategies. This type of chart effectively displays the variability in returns, highlighting the differences between the best and worst performers.

For instance, take long/short equity funds as an example, which typically have a high and positive beta to equity markets,how significant variability. The best-performing fund in this straetgy gained over 60%, while the worst-performing fund lost over 70%. Such a wide range underscores the importance of careful selection and monitoring.

Similarly, for discretionary macro fund, which rely on managers making specific bets on macroeconomic developments show varied performance. the majority of the funds navigated 2023 very well producing a positive return, but one fund blew up and lost over 70%. While the majority navigated 2023 well, producing positive returns, one fund experienced a significant loss of over 70%. These extreme losses can greatly impact a portfolio, especially given the concentrated nature of many hedge fund allocations. The presence of such outliers, or “left-tail” funds, can substantially affect the overall performance and risk profile of a hedge fund portfolio.

Lack of Return Persistence
The second reason making active hedge fund selection difficult is that there is little return persistent in hedge fund performance. In simpler terms, past performance is not a reliable indicator of future success.

Let me pose a question: If we rank all hedge funds in a benchmark universe by quartiles, what percentage of top-quartile funds remain in the top quartile after three years? Is it A: around 75%, B: around 50%, or C: around 25%?

The data shows a surprising reality. The first two bars on the left illustrate the probability of a top-quartile fund moving into a different quartile over three years. Therefore, if a fund starts in the top quartile position, indicated in blue, only has a 28% chance of staying there. Moreover, it has a 23% chance of moving to the second quartile, a 23% chance of dropping to the third quartile, and a 26% chance of falling to the bottom quartile.  Essentially, a top-quartile fund is almost as likely to end up in the bottom quartile as it is to stay at the top.

Conversely, looking at the two bars on the right-hand side, we saw that a fund that starts as a bottom performer has a 27% chance of becoming the top performer in three years.

In fact, regardless of which quartile a fund starts in, it seems that this fund has an equal chance (around 25%) of being in any of the quartiles. This suggests randomness in hedge funds’ performance against their peers, making it very difficult to identify the future outperformer just by looking at past performance alone.


Difficulty of consistently outpeform benchmark
We can look at this in a different way. what percentage of funds that beat an equally weighted benchmark consecutively?
By definition of the equally weighted benchmark, over one year, 50% of the funds beat the benchmark. However, the number of funds beating the benchmark drops significantly over two and three consecutive years.  This pattern underscores the challenges of selecting hedge funds and the difficulty of building a hedge fund portfolio that consistently beat the benchmark.  

These are not unique challenges to the hedge fund industry. We saw similar challenges in equities and fixed-income, and the market’s response to this is an explosion of passive vehicles that offer investors an extremely cheap and efficient way to access different asset classes, factors, or all types of securities.
However, passive investing in hedge funds wasn’t available until recently when we launched the abrdn Eclipse hedge fund benchmark tracker platform, which tracks the HFR’s investable benchmark indices.

Introduction of Passive Investing in Hedge Funds
HFR’s investable indices addressed a lot of legacy issues in hedge fund benchmarks. Unlike other non-investable hedge fund benchmarks where the construction methodology is filled with bias and assumptions, the investable index is a live index that follows a pre-determined methodology which eliminates the common biases, with a realistic rebalance methodology, making the indices satisfy CFA’s SAMURAI principle for benchmarking which is Specified, Appropriate, Measurable, Unambiguous, Reflective and Investable. Because the benchmark index is investable, the abrdn Eclipse can run tracker funds to completely track the benchmarks by investing in all of the underlying hedge funds with the same weights as the benchmarks.
Currently, we have 9 tracker funds, with one tracker fund on the top level that tracks the flagship HFRI 500 Index, which is meant to represent the overall investable hedge fund universe. In addition, there are eight sub-strategy tracker funds that track eight distinct sub-strategies that make up the HFRI 500 Index. This enables flexibility and customisation capabilities for our clients.
So, what are some of the benefits of investing passively in hedge funds?
The first one is it’s cost-effectively. Given the simple implementation of passive investing, only a minimal management fee is charged for the passive funds; this means over a long period of time, passive investing can potentially outperform active investing due to a lower cost structure, as demonstrated in this chart. The passive performance is represented using the HFRI 500 Index, and the active is the HFRI Fund of Funds Composite Index.
Management fees and performance fees are not the only savings from going passive. There are also savings in resources and time. Active investment requires a large team of researchers to talk to many managers, write reports, and make qualitative judgements. In addition, it can also mean a long lead time from research to deployment of your hedge fund allocations. Therefore, efficient and cost-effective is a unique attribute to passive investing.

The second benefit is diversification in your hedge fund portfolio. In this slide, each blue dot represents an underlying constituent of the HFRI 500 Index, and the purple diamond is the HFRI 500 Index. On the x-axis, you have the annualised volatility, and on the y-axis, you have the annualised return.  
The horizontal dotted line shows the average return of the constituents and you can see the HFRI 500 Index has a return around the average, as expected.
The vertical dotted line shows the average volatility of the underlying funds. The HFRI 500 Index’s volatility is considerably lower due to diversification, reducing by over 60% compared to the average volatility. The investor benefits from the diversification benefits of owning many lowly correlated funds. 
As we mentioned earlier, a typical hedge fund allocation is concentrated. If your portfolio includes these funds circled in the chart with large drawdowns, this would have a significantly negative impact on your portfolio.
Investors choose to invest in hedge funds because they think it will be additive to their portfolio. Having money managed by professional managers means lower risk and gives you less headaches. However, by selecting individual hedge funds, you inevitably introduce selection risks, which means your hedge funds might not be fulfilling their designed purpose.

Hedge funds are a selection of strategies designed to capture different premiums and have their unique market environment that makes the most impact. In this chart, we split the market into two types of volatility regimes: high-vol or low-vol. The bars are the average monthly return of each strategy type in these two regimes. The first thing to note is most strategies produce positive returns in all market environments, which makes sense and why hedge funds tend to have an absolute return target.
However, during market stress, we see sub-strategies such as Volatility RV, Systematic Macro and Discretionary Macro performance well. On the other hand, during lower volatile environments, strategies such as long-short equity and event-driven multi-strategy deliver good performance instead. 
Having passive tracker funds that are able to track all these distinct strategies means that investors can quickly increase strategy exposures, getting their target strategy allocation. In comparison, in the active selection, it is not uncommon that it takes 6-month maybe a year, to find new hedge funds and conduct due diligence till making an allocation.
Just like what we see in passive investing in traditional markets, passive investing in hedge funds can unlock new investment approaches and provide more tools for our clients to reach their investment objectives. I listed a few here.
First, you can deploy a core/satellite investment approach. An investor can hold a core position in the passive tracker fund to gain benchmark return with minimal tracking error and free ups resources, capital and risk tolerance to a concentrated satellite position in high-conviction hedge funds.
Second, you can use the passive tracker as an introduction to hedge fund investment or alternative investment in general. The esoteric, lack of transparency nature of hedge funds and the high barrier of entry of active selection means many investors who want to invest in hedge funds couldn’t. A passive tracker solves this problem.
Third, strategy exposure. You can quickly and effectively gain strategy exposure and complete your target strategy asset allocation. More importantly, you do that without introducing fund selection risks.
Finally, portfolio management. Like all alternative investments, you often sit on some cash between deployments. Allocating cash in a hedge fund benchmark tracker means you are getting a diversified alternative return with low risk while giving up liquidities because of the investable nature of the HFRI hedge fund benchmarks.
In this final slide, I summarised what we discussed in this presentation. I don’t think investing in hedge funds should be either active or passive. However, by having the ability to invest passively and understanding each solution and the trade-offs between them, we can all make a wiser decision and be a better allocator.

